The first three tasks are the practice task, Option A and Option B are pre-approved explore badges.  Hover over one of them on your issue to create an independent issue to track it.  Title the new issue `Explore: IDE-X` where `X` is `A` or `B` based on your choice. On the explore badge, when it is ready for submission, request a review from Dr. Brown. 

1. Examine the IDE you use most and add {index}`frequentide.md` to your kwl with notes about which features it does/not have based on what you learned in the in-class activity. 
1. Try a new IDE and make some notes about how it was to learn in {index}`newide.md`  What is easy? hard?  What could you apply from the ones you already use?  Were there features you had trouble finding? 
2.  Add at least one comment on others' posts on the [GitHub discussions](https://github.com/introcompsys/discussion-fa23-community/discussions/categories/ide-class) about IDEs.
3. (option A) Compare at least 3 IDEs for working in a single language. Your comparison should be based on first hand experience using each of the IDEs. Complete the same task in each tool. Create `favoriteide.md` to define and justify your preferred IDE. Describe the procedure you did to compare the IDEs. Include a ranked list of your criteria(which attributes and features) with justification/explanation of your ranking of these criteria. Then describe how each of the three IDEs meets/does not meet those criteria, and a conclusion of which IDE is the best based on your criteria.
4. (option B) Create a small repo owned by introcompsys named `ide-USERNAME` where `USERNAME` is your gh username with some example code, a vscode/codespace [devcontainer file](https://docs.github.com/en/codespaces/setting-up-your-project-for-codespaces/adding-a-dev-container-configuration/introduction-to-dev-containers) that installs [CodeTour](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=vsls-contrib.codetour) and your favorite extension(s).  Write a CodeTour that walks someone through using your favorite extension to do something with the code. 
The example code can be any language, can be very simple, can even have a bug in it if that helps your example. You can use an LLM to generate some code for this purpose if you do not have some available to you already, but you cannot share solutions to a course assignment without that instructor's permission. Link to your repo in your 