---
file_format: mystnb
kernelspec:
    name: python3
---


# How do I choose a Programming Language for a project?



+++

Today we'll explore how programming languages are cateogrized. Along the way, this will expose what core, generic features of a programming language are.  

+++

The key takeaway that I want for your is to have intution for how to choose a language for a project, not only your favorite, but what is the best for different types of projects.

+++

If you are completing the Experience Report to make up for missing class, I reocmmend starting it at the start of making up the activity. 

```{important}
 Use the makeup workflow with an [ISO formated date](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html) (YYYY-MM-DD)). 
```
+++


##  Comparing languages you know

Tak a few minutes on your own to fill in the follwing table for two languages of your own. Replace the `<langugage>` with two languages that you are familiar with. Add two additional rows. You can do this by memory, or by looking up/discussing. If you look things up, be sure to use reputable sources and include links to them. 

```
| feature | <language> | <language></language> |
| ------ | ------ | ------ |
| use of whitespace     | Text     | Text     |
| list/array types |   | |
| variable typing |  | | 
| memory usage | | | 
```


Post your table  on [GitHub in the language comparisons discussion](https://github.com/introcompsys/discussion-fa23-community/discussions/17). Reply to at least two peers offering either advice or asking additional questions.  



## Learn more

Read these slides: [intro to PL](https://www3.cs.stonybrook.edu/~pfodor/courses/CSE260/_L01_Introduction_Programming_Languages.pdf)




## PL in Developer Survey

+++

Read Carefully the [developer survey// languages section](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey)
for 2023.

+++



Include answers to the following questions in your experience report for today. 
- what is surprising?
- what did you expect?
- what do the popular languages have in common?
- what do the dreaded languages have in common?
- How are popular vs dreaded languages different? What features might be the cause for making a language dreaded?
- How to used languages differ from less commonly used languages? What features might be the cause for making a languge popular? 
- How have things changed over the years of the survey?  



## Prepare for Next Class

```{include} ../_prepare/2023-12-12.md
```

## Review today's class

```{include} ../_review/2023-12-07.md
```



## More Practice

```{include} ../_practice/2023-12-07.md
```



## Experience Report Evidence

If in class you should have the alternate file we made.  If for makeup, your report should have all of the content above. 

## Questions After Today's Class 


### Is it possible to only work with one language and never even consider using other languages?

Maybe if you work at one company forever, but not easy. 

### Are deep learning libraries that are changed from python to another language open source?

It's not so much that they're changed from Python to other langauges as far as I know.  For example tensorflow has a C++ API and the optimized parts of it are written in C++.  It is a Python library, but more than [half of the content in the repo is C++](https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow).  It is open source though. 


### What typically makes languages go obsolete?

Some stay necessary in a small sense forever (as far as we have experienced so far) because something critical is written in it. For example [COBOL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COBOL#Isolation_from_the_computer_science_community) has been basically considered irrelevant by computer scientists the whole time, but it is still what [95% of ATM swipes rely on](https://fingfx.thomsonreuters.com/gfx/rngs/USA-BANKS-COBOL/010040KH18J/index.html).

More often I would say a language might never become popular and then becoe obsolete or a version of a language can become obsolete. 

More research on this is a good explore badge. 

### Is it worthwhile to learn how Docker works in order to be more employable?

Docker is worth learning.  

### How often should I be weighing my options for the programming language I'm going to use for a project?

If you are starting a project from scratch it is worth thinking about it. 

### What class would give you a license to MATLAB so you can get experience for professional use?


Here is [URI's MATLAB](https://its.uri.edu/services/945d672c1dc20ce895a496473abc9dc42c2f55f411/) access information.  You do not need to be in a specific class. 