# Wrap up


```{important}
Complete the IDEA survey
```

## Clarification Community Badge Option

You can submit ideas to improve any badge's instructions for a community badge.  Your suggestion cannot give away the *answer* or the whole point of the task. 

Include the new instructions in a new `clarifications` folder in your KWL repo.  Each clarified badge should have the same relative path from the clarifications folder as it currently does within the course website repo. To get credit, I have to be able to select a single commit in the PR files changed tab and see your changes highlighted as a diff from the course website version.  

```{note}
Think about what you need to do for there to be one commit that highlights your changes to the file carefully before you start. 

This bonus opportunity requires that you understand paths and how commit diffs work.
```

You can earn up to 3 community badges this way, but each one must be a separate PR.  



## Deadline Extension

```{important}
I will not start final grading on Friday, so I will give an extension for work to be submitted until **December 18**. 
```

## IDEA incentive 

The class passed the 75% response rate, so the [IDEA incentive](incentive) is active. 


## Final badge

The [final badge opportunity](https://classroom.github.com/a/tkLSTERh) is a separate activity that can be done outside of your KWL with a team or alone. It is worth up to 3 practice or 2 explore, whichever will improve your grade more. That is if you do not have 18 practice, this will be used as 3, otherwise it will be 2 explore. If it is only partially correct it will be counted as up to 3 review badges.

If you were not in class, you may only join a team with people who were in class if your team mates agree to that. To show proof of all agreeing in the repo, add a file called `team` and add the text `I asked before I joined this team and all team mates agreed`.  The other team mates must make their own commits that add their name and with the commit message `my name confirms my support`.

```{important}
I made [some minor clarifications](https://github.com/introcompsys/clearing-misconceptions/commit/09d25f9215d9c854ea9902cd7a1fdfc35b5a0f93) to the instructions. 

For a community badge comment with a thumbs up emoji on that commit and then log the community badge.
```

## Bonus

```{important}
For reading this update, claim a community badge by adding the following line to your `community_contributions.md` file in your KWL and make the PR title `community - reading announcements`
```