# What is an IDE?  

Work through the following on your own or in groups in class.  

If in class, make sure to stop at 1:35 to leave extra time for the experience report, because it is a little longer than the regular in class experience badges. 

## Review your notes



```{important}
Do this before proceeding to the next section. 
The x.y are sections and the x.y.z are subsections.
```



Either discuss with peers in class or on the GitHub (asynch) discuss commonalities in your IDE notes.

```{note}
Spend 15-20 minutes on this
```

### In person



1. What different tasks did all of you use an IDE for?
1. What features of an IDE did you all use?
1. Which features were used but not very much?
1. Share the most helpful IDE feature you use?



Update your individual IDE notes with 1-2 things you learned from your peers. Include this updated file in your experience report. 


### On GitHub



There are questions on the [GitHub Discussion](https://github.com/introcompsys/discussion-fa23-community/discussions/14). Update your individual IDE notes in your KWL repo with links to your post and replies.



## Learn more

```{note}
This should take the majority of class time. 
Spend 30-40 minutes on this. 
```


- [What is an IDE?](https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/middleware/what-is-ide)
- [compare IDEs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_integrated_development_environments)
- Most popular in [2021](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2021#section-most-popular-technologies-integrated-development-environment)
- Most popular in [2022](https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2022/#most-popular-technologies-new-collab-tools)




### In person
In class with your peers you can divide these up and read one and then share key points with others.



With your group, build a large list of IDE attributes or features that would be important, and make a table of how would you evaluate attribute?  Which ones would you evaluate by just if it exists or not?  Which ones would you evaluate in different degrees, what attributes of them would you evaluate?


Discuss with your group how you would rank them.  You do not all have to agree on a final ranking, but notice the differences.




[vs code is open source](https://github.com/Microsoft/vscode/)


Have one member of the group summarize  what your group discussed [on GitHub](https://github.com/introcompsys/discussion-fa23-community/discussions/15) for your classmates.  Note the ranking, with any disagreements. Include your group members by @ mentioning them. 

### Asynchronous



After reading the above, also read at least 3 different articles or blog posts about the "best IDE" for your favorite language or for multiple languages.  

Notice what  IDE attributes or features the authors think is important, and how they evaluate each criterion. Which ones are evaluted as present/missing?  Which ones are evaluated in more detail. 

Join the discussion on [on GitHub](https://github.com/introcompsys/discussion-fa23-community/discussions/15)  summarizing what you found the most important criteria to be and if you personally agree or not. Link your sources. 


## Features and Extensions

```{note}
Skip this if the above runs over time, otherwise spend a few minutes preparing and then only 2-3 minutes per student demo-ing your feature or extension. 
```

If in class, share your favorite IDE features or extensions to get a head start on your practice badge. 

Think about how I modeled the multi-cursor feature in class. 

Optional: Try using the Air media to demo it. 

## Experience Reports


For today, whether you are in class or asynchronous use the experience report (makeup) action.  Use ISO date format: YYYY-MM-DD for the workflow input. 


## Prepare for Next Class


```{include} ../_prepare/2023-11-14.md
``` 




## Review today's class

```{include} ../_review/2023-11-09.md
```





## More Practice

```{include} ../_practice/2023-11-09.md
```


## Questions After Today's Class 

Will be gathered from your experience reports. 